@node Design a GUI application
@chapter Design a GUI Application

@quotation
Don't ask whether you can do something, but how to do it.
@author Adele Goldberg
@end quotation

@*

In the previous chapter, we explained how to handle user interactions on
widgets such as buttons and text editors. We illustrated this with a complete
memory game; we did not particularly pay attention to how the responsibilities
were spread across the various objects involved. In a small project, this
doesn't really matter. However, as soon as you want your project to grow, it
can lead to complicated code that is difficult to evolve and maintain.

@menu
* Responsibilities::
* Model View Presenter::
* The Three Musketeers::
@end menu

@node Responsibilities
@section Responsibilities

In @acronym{OOP, Object Oriented Programming}, we like each object to be
responsible for its assigned task. Of course, we can assign many kinds of extended
tasks to a few objects, as we did in @ref{Memory Game v1}, but this is not
considered good design.

A growing project produces legacy code. When the responsibilities of the objects
are not properly bounded, it makes this code difficult to understand and
maintain. A developer willing to make changes will face various challenges
and difficulties: distinguishing how the responsibilities are spread across the
involved objects, if at all; facing long methods that are hard to understand;
replacing one behavior or class by another, which may require replacing
several; and collaborating with multiple developers, each working
independently on one facet of the project; and more.

A good practice is to design an object with a clearly assigned task, ideally
one per object. Each method of the object should come with meaningful
names@footnote{The book @emph{Smalltalk with Style} is worth reading to write good
Smalltalk code.}, and a clearly assigned task. Ideally, a method
should not be longer than 10 lines.

With this practice in mind, when it comes to @acronym{GUI, Graphical User
Interface} application development, there is a well-known design pattern:
@acronym{MVC, Model View Controller} or its alternative @acronym{MVP, Model View
Presenter}. In this design pattern, the responsibilities are spread across three
orthogonal axes with no conceptual overlap.

In the following sections, we present the details of this design pattern, applied
step by step to the memory game presented in the previous chapter.

@cindex @acronym{MVC, Model View Controller}
@cindex @acronym{MVP, Model View Presenter}

@node Model View Presenter
@section Model View Presenter

@acronym{MVC}@footnote{@url{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model-view-controller}}
and
@acronym{MVP}@footnote{@url{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model-view-presenter}}
designs are very similar. @acronym{MVC}, nowadays widely used in GUI and
Web application development, was invented by the Smalltalk community
in the late seventies and early eighties. @acronym{MVP} is a subtle
variation where the presenter has more responsibilities than the
controller and acts more as a middleman between the model and view
objects.

Let's review the responsibilities of each of the three objects.

@itemize
@item
@strong{Model.} This object defines a domain by its intrinsic characteristics,
related to the intended goal. A Person model may have attributes like family
name, first name, and gender; or in another design, it could have a unique
anonymous identifier attribute.

The model knows nothing about the view and presenter involved in the design.
However, a model that modifies its own attributes should have a way to notify the
views to update their representation of the model. This is the role of the
dependency mechanism explained later in the chapter.

@item
@strong{View.} It is responsible for displaying a meaningful view of
the model to the user, such as a Person model. The view can be passive to display the
attributes of a Person model or interactive to edit them. One model may be displayed by one or several different views.
@emph{Therefore, a model object has no knowledge of the views} acting on it.

@item
@strong{Presenter.} This object acts as a middleman between the model and the
view, instantiating and gluing both together, and acts as the entry point in the
application@footnote{This is an assumed variation from the view, which is used as the
entry point of the traditional approach. Being a middleman, it makes sense that it is
instantiated first.}.

The presenter also handles user actions mediated by the views of a given
model. Therefore, when the user edits a text entry, clicks on a button, selects
an entry in a menu, or drags a visual object, the event is handled by the
presenter. The presenter then decides, depending on the context and state of the
application, what to do with the event, like handing suitable data to the model, and 
eventually updating the state of the application.
@end itemize

Now, let's see how to reshape our memory game to fit it into the
@acronym{MVP} design.

@cindex @acronym{MVP,Model View Presenter} @subentry model
@subsection Memory Game Model

The model is the isolated object in the design, without knowledge of the presenter
and the view@footnote{Though several models may know about each other.}, so it is 
easier to start from there.

In the previous design of the game, we had two classes, @class{MemoryGameWindow}
and @class{MemoryCard}, acting as view @emph{and} model. Therefore, we need to extract
what is model-related.

Our game involves the domain of a game with cards. We define two models:

@itemize
@item
@class{MemoryCardModel}. It knows about the intrinsic characteristics of a card
in the context of the memory game. In the earlier game design, the
@class{MemoryCard} view knew about its @smalltalk{cardColor} and its states
@smalltalk{done} and @smalltalk{flipped}; the @smalltalk{flipped} state was deduced
by a method based on the color attribute of the view. These three characteristics are
clearly part of the card model and need to be represented by instance attributes:

@smalltalkExample{
Object subclass: #MemoryCardModel
   instanceVariableNames: 'flipped done color'
   @dots{}}

We add the necessary initialization and methods to externally get the
state and to update it.

@smalltalkMethod{initialize,
done := flipped := false}

When a card has been successfully associated with cards sharing the
same color, we set it as done, and it can't be played anymore:
@smalltalkMethod{setDone, done := true}

To evaluate the available cards to play, we need to know if a card is done or not:

@smalltalkMethod{isDone, @return{} done}

During a player's move, we need to know if a card is already flipped. If so, the
player can't flip it again:

@smalltalkMethod{isFlipped, @return{} flipped}

@item
@class{MemoryGameModel}. This model defines what a memory game is. The previous
@class{MemoryGameWindow} had 6 instance variables, a mix of view and domain-related
attributes: @smalltalk{size}, @smalltalk{cards}, @smalltalk{tupleSize},
@smalltalk{statusBar}, @smalltalk{playground}, and @smalltalk{playing}. Only the
first three attributes are related to the characteristics of the game. We may
hesitate on the latter one @smalltalk{playing}, but it will prove to be more
useful in the presenter to determine the state of the application.

@smalltalkExample{Object subclass: #MemoryGameModel
   instanceVariableNames: 'size tupleSize cards'
   @dots{}}

@itemize
@item
@smalltalk{size}. A point representing the disposition of the cards.
@smalltalk{4@@3} denotes 3 rows of 4 cards.

@item
@smalltalk{tupleSize}. An integer, the number of associated cards to find,
by default 2.

@item
@smalltalk{cards}. The collection of @class{MemoryCardModel} instances.
@end itemize

We have the necessary methods to initialize the instance and to create the card
models. Compared to its counterpart @method{MemoryGameWindow>>installCards} of
the previous design, the method @method{installCards} here is much simpler and
easier to understand because it only instantiates the card models. Separation
of responsibility is paying off:

@smalltalkMethod{initialize,
size := 4 @@ 3.
tupleSize := 2}

@smalltalkMethod{installCardModels,
| colors |
cards := Array2D newSize: size.
colors := self distributeColors.
1 to: size y do: [:y |
   1 to: size x do: [:x | 
      cards
         at: x@@y
         put: (MemoryCardModel new color: colors removeFirst) ] ]}

In this class, we also import, unchanged, the behaviors of
@class{MemoryGameWindow} fitting the game model:
@method{distributeColors}, @method{doneCards}, @method{flippedCards},
@method{undoneCards} and @method{isGameWon}.

That's it for the models of the game.
@end itemize

@cindex @acronym{MVP,Model View Presenter} @subentry view
@subsection Memory Game View

We have defined two model classes, so we might expect to define two view classes.
Well, not necessarily. Here we just need to define one view class for the whole
game, and we use an existing view of @cuis{} for the card model, the
@class{PluggableButtonMorph}.

We need to reshape @class{MemoryGameWindow} to contain only view-related
tasks, first in its attributes then its behaviors. First of all, @emph{a view
always knows about its presenter}, it can even know about the model through the
mediation of the presenter:

@smalltalkMethod{presenter: aPresenter, presenter := aPresenter. self
model: presenter model}

It also knows about some other views needed for its internal
organisation and regulation:

@smalltalkExample{SystemWindow subclass: #MemoryGameWindow
   instanceVariableNames: 'presenter statusBar playground'
   @dots{}}

Again, the behavior is stripped down to only view considerations, and the
@method{initialize} method is shortened.

Installing the toolbar changes slightly:

@smalltalkMethod{installToolbar,
| toolbar button |
toolbar := LayoutMorph newRow separation: 2.
button := PluggableButtonMorph model: presenter action: #startGame :: 
   enableSelector: #isStopped;
@dots{}}

The model of the buttons is no longer the view but is now the @smalltalk{presenter}.

Indeed, we explained earlier that it is the presenter's responsibility to handle
user events. The actions remain the same, and we can anticipate the related
methods will be transferred from the view to the presenter class.

Now, we should look at installing the card views:

@anchor{MemoryGameWindow>>installCards}
@smalltalkMethod{installCards,
| row size |
playground removeAllMorphs.
size := model size.
1 to: size y do: [:y |
   row := LayoutMorph newRow.
   1 to: size x do: [:x | | cardModel cardView |
      cardModel := model cards at: x@@y.
      cardView := PluggableButtonMorph
         model: presenter
         action: #flip:
         actionArgument: x@@y.
      @dots{}
      cardView layoutSpec: (LayoutSpec proportionalWidth: 1 proportionalHeight: 1).
      cardView color: cardModel backColor.
      row addMorph: cardView].
   playground addMorph: row ]}

It relies on the already instantiated card models; we ask the game model for all
the card models: @smalltalk{model cards}.

Observe how we just use a stock @class{PluggableButtonMorph} as a view for the
card. Indeed, we don't need to specialize its behavior, so we keep it simple.
Again, the @smalltalk{presenter} handles the user's click on the card. This should be
understood as executing the statement @smalltalk{presenter flip: x@@y} at the
event@footnote{The message @msg{model:action:actionArgument:} to instantiate a
button is extremely confusing in its @smalltalk{model:} keyword; it is not a
model as we discussed earlier, but only the receiver of the user action, the
@emph{controller} in the sense of the @acronym{MVC} pattern.}.

For clarity, we have presented above a shortened version of the
@method{installCards} method, without the dependencies between the card models
and the card views. The logic of installing the card models, then the card views,
is handled by the presenter, the middleman. We discuss it in the next section.

@cindex @acronym{MVP, Model View Presenter} @subentry presenter

@subsection Memory Game Presenter

We define a new class @class{MemoryGame} as our presenter:

@smalltalkExample{Object subclass: #MemoryGame
   instanceVariableNames: 'model view playing'
   classVariableNames: ''
   poolDictionaries: ''
   category: 'MemoryGameV2'}

It acts as the entry point of a GUI application, therefore its name is kept short
with no @emph{Presenter} fragment. A new game instance is then invoked by a
simple:

@smalltalkExample{MemoryGame new}

As we explained earlier, the presenter instantiates both the model and the view:

@smalltalkMethod{initialize,
model := MemoryGameModel new.
view := MemoryGameWindow presenter: self.
self startGame.
view openInWorld}

Observe that the game model is attached neither to the view nor to the presenter.

From the initialization, the game is then started:

@smalltalkMethod{startGame,
model installCardModels.
view installCards.
view message: 'Starting a new game' bold green.
view setLabel: 'P L A Y I N G'.
playing := true}

By separatting the installation of card models and views, each object in
charge of those tasks is asked to perform its own responsibilities.

We already learned that the @method{flip:} method, called when the user clicks on a
card, is now defined in the presenter. The method is quite similar to the
previous iteration, except now we only know about the card model. The associated
card view is unknown:

@smalltalkMethod{flip: position,
| flippedCards |
(model cards at: position) 
   flip;
   triggerEvent: #lock.	
flippedCards := model flippedCards.
@dots{}
   " Unflip and unlock the flipped cards "
   flippedCards do: [:aCard | 
      aCard flip; 
         triggerEvent: #flash;
         triggerEvent: #unlock].
   @return{} self].
@dots{}
   " We found an n-tuple! "
   view message: 'Great!' bold@comma{} ' You found a '@comma{} model tupleSize asString@comma{} '-tuple!'.
   flippedCards do: [:aCard | aCard triggerEvent: #flash].
   flippedCards do: #setDone.
@dots{}}

@cindex event @subentry trigger

Therefore, to update the state of a card view, a card model triggers events
which are propagated to any card view listening to the events. An event is coded
as a symbol representing an aspect of the model that has changed. The symbol name is
arbitrarily chosen to be meaningful. In the @method{flip:} method, there are
three events:

@itemize
@item
@smalltalk{lock}. It informs that the card is locked and it cannot be played anymore.

@item
@smalltalk{flash}. It informs that the card is revealing itself.

@item
@smalltalk{unlock}. It informs that the card is unlocked and it can be played again.
@end itemize

When triggering an event, it is additionally possible to pass along a
parameter. Observe this feature in the model's @method{flip} method to inform
about the card color change:

@smalltalkMethod{MemoryCardModel>>flip,
| newColor |
flipped := flipped not.
newColor := flipped ifTrue: [color ] ifFalse: [self backColor].
self triggerEvent: #color with: newColor }

All in all, there are four events triggered by a card model: @smalltalk{lock},
@smalltalk{flash}, @smalltalk{unlock}, and @smalltalk{color}. How a view
listens for a specific event is discussed in the next section.

@node The Three Musketeers
@section The Three Musketeers

The model, the view, and the presenter are tied together. Unlike the three
musketeers, who were tied together by friendship and the fight for justice,
our three objects are tied together by the dependency mechanism we discussed
in the previous sections.

Earlier, we wrote that a model does not know about its view(s). However, how can a
view be notified that its model has changed?

@cindex event @subentry update
@cindex event @subentry change
@cindex dependency @seeentry{event}
@subsection Update/Change

In the @acronym{MVC} design, a view is added as a dependent object to the model
it wants to receive updates from:

@smalltalkExample{model addDependent: aView.
@dots{}
model changed: #color}

Then the dependent view receives an @msg{update:} message with an argument
exposing the changed aspect in the model. It must handle it appropriately:

@smalltalkMethod{view>>update: aspect,
aspect == #color ifTrue: [self color: model color]
@dots{}}

A view can stop listening to a model to no longer receive the @msg{update:} message:

@smalltalkExample{model removeDependent: aView}

There are two drawbacks to this design. All the changed aspects in the model are
handled in a single @method{update:} method in each listening view. If there are
a lot of aspects to handle, the @method{update:} becomes cluttered. Secondly, the
update is sent to all the views, independently of their interest for a particular
aspect. Think about a view not interested in the change of the color aspect of a
model; it still receives color updates.

The changed/update mechanism appeared with the @acronym{MVC} design. Looking at
the implementation of the @method{changed:} method is interesting:

@smalltalkMethod{Object>>changed: aspectSymbol,
"Receiver changed. The change is denoted by the argument. 
Usually the argument is a Symbol that is part of the observer's change 
protocol. Inform all of the observers.
Note: In Smalltalk-80 observers were called 'dependents'."

self 
   triggerEvent: #changed:
   with: aspectSymbol}

Underneath, it is implemented with the trigger event we met in the previous
section. Indeed, it is now superseded and implemented with the observer pattern,
which offers more flexibility. We discuss it in the next section.

The changed/update mechanism is still widely used in Morphic widgets,
therefore it is worth getting acquainted with.

@cindex observer pattern @seeentry{event}
@cindex event @subentry observer pattern

@subsection The Observer Pattern

When several views are tied to an identical model, a given view may only be
interested in receiving updates of a specific aspect of the model.

To do so, we specifically register the aspect a view is interested in:

@smalltalkExample{model when: #border send: #adjustBorder to: view.
model when: #color send: #setColor: to: anotherView}

Then the model triggers events:

@smalltalkExample{model triggertEvent: #border.
model triggerEvent: #color with: Color red}

And the effects on the views are equivalent to the sent messages:

@smalltalkExample{view adjustBorder.
anotherView setColor: Color red}

The sent message is set at the time the event is registered with the message
@msg{when:send:to:} and the optional parameter is set when triggering the event
with the message @msg{triggerEvent:with:}.

An additional flexibility of the observer pattern is that it is not required to subclass
the view to implement a specific method, as was necessary with the
@method{update:} method.

In our memory game, this is one reason we don't need to define a card view
class; we use the stock @class{PluggableButtonMorph}. Observe how we register
these events. We previously left out this part (@xref{MemoryGameWindow>>installCards}):

@smalltalkMethod{installCards,
@dots{}
cardView := PluggableButtonMorph model: presenter action: #flip: actionArgument: x@@y.
cardModel
   when: #color send: #color: to: cardView;
   when: #lock send:#lock to: cardView;
   when: #unlock send: #unlock to: cardView;
   when: #flash send: #flash to: cardView.			
cardView layoutSpec: (LayoutSpec proportionalWidth: 1 proportionalHeight: 1).
@dots{}}

One last detail: to foster your understanding of the relation between these two
event mechanisms, the @method{addDependent:} method is also implemented with
the observer pattern:

@smalltalkMethod{Object>>addDependent: anObserver,
"Make the given object one of the receiver's observers (dependents).
Receivers of this message@comma{} i.e. objects being observed@comma{} are usually called Models.
Observing can also be set up sending one of the #when:send:to: or #addDependent: messages.
Models will send themselves #changed:@comma{} #changed or one of the #triggerEvent* messages to notify possible observers.
If appropriate@comma{} it is best to make Models inherit from ActiveModel@comma{} for performance reasons."

self
   when: #changed:
   send: #update:
   to: anObserver.
@return{} anObserver}

@xref{Memory Game v2} for the complete game code.

We end our chapter here regarding the design of a GUI application. The more you
use this design, the more you will appreciate it, particularly when a project
grows.
