@node Handle user interaction
@chapter Handle User Interaction

This chapter covers the use of widgets in the base @cuis{} image. We
hope the examples presented in this chapter provide enough knowledge
to further explore the @cuis{} widgets and tools present in the base
image. We discuss core functionalities such as associating a widget
with a model, handling user interactions, and updating a widget from a
model. We conclude the chapter with the fully functional @ref{Memory
Game v1}.
@menu
* Button::
* Menu::
* Text entry::
* List::
* Memory game::
@end menu

@cindex widget @subentry button
@node Button
@section Button

Perhaps the simplest user interaction to implement
is responding to button clicks.
The @class{PluggableButtonMorph} supports this.

Several of the @class{Morph} subclasses are "pluggable". This means
they can be configured through composition rather than inheritance.
Configuration is achieved by specifying a model object and a selector
for messages to be sent to the model object when an interaction occurs.

Instances of the @class{PluggableButtonMorph} class can be created
with the @msg{model:action:label:} class method.  The
@smalltalk{model:} keyword specifies a model object, the
@smalltalk{action:} keyword specifies a selector for the model object,
and the @smalltalk{label:} keyword specifies the text that appears in
the button.

Let's demonstrate using a @class{PluggableButtonMorph} by
defining a class that opens a window containing a single button.
Initially the window background color is white.
Clicking the button toggles the color between red and blue.

Create the following class:

@smalltalkExample{Object subclass: #ButtonDemo
   instanceVariableNames: 'layout'
   classVariableNames: ''
   poolDictionaries: ''
   category: 'Demo'}

Define the following instance methods:

@smalltalkMethod{initialize,
| button extent window |
button := PluggableButtonMorph
   model: self
      action: #toggleColor
      label: 'Toggle'.
button setBalloonText: 'toggle background color'.
window := SystemWindow new.
window setLabel: 'Button Demo'; addMorph: button.
        
extent := button morphExtent.
"Add some space to the left and right of the button label."
button morphExtent: (extent x + 15) @@ extent y.
        
"Set window size to the smallest height that contains its submorphs."
layout := window layoutMorph.
layout padding: 10.
window
   openInWorld;
   morphExtent: 400 @@ layout minimumExtent y.}

@smalltalkMethod{toggleColor,
layout color: (
   layout color = Color red
      ifTrue: [ Color blue ]
      ifFalse: [ Color red ] )}

Open a Workspace and evaluate @smalltalk{ButtonDemo new}.
Hover over the "Toggle" button for a second
to see its tooltip (a.k.a balloon text).
Click the "Toggle" button several times and
note how the window background color changes.

@figure{ButtomDemo window, ch04-buttondemo-window, 4}

@cindex widget @subentry menu
@node Menu
@section Menu

@cuis{} offers several easy-to-use options for menus to inform or to ask
the user to make a choice.

@cindex widget @subentry menu @subentry pop up

@subsection Pop Up

The class @class{PopUpMenu} provides an easy way to render a dialog that
displays information, asks the user for confirmation, or asks the user to
select an option. It is similar to the JavaScript DOM functions @code{alert}
and @code{confirm}.

For example:

@figure{A pop up menu to inform, ch04-popupmenu-inform, 6}

@smalltalkExampleCaption{Simple pop up menu,popupMenu1,
PopUpMenu inform: 'Something interesting just happened.'.}

@figure{A pop up menu to answer Yes or No, ch04-popupmenu-confirm, 4}

@smalltalkExampleCaption{Yes or No pop up menu, popupMenu2,
likesIceCream := PopUpMenu confirm: 'Do you like ice cream?'.
likesIceCream print. "prints true or false"}

@figure{A pop up menu to select among two choices, ch04-popupmenu-confirm-truechoice-falsechoice, 4}

@smalltalkExampleCaption{Two choices pop up menu, popupMenu3,
likesIceCream := PopUpMenu
    confirm: 'Do you like ice cream?'
    trueChoice: 'Love it!'
    falseChoice: 'Not for me'.
likesIceCream print. "prints true or false"}

@figure{A pop up menu to select among several choices, ch04-popupmenu-withcaption-choosefrom, 3}

@smalltalkExampleCaption{Many choices pop up menu, popupMenu4,
color := PopUpMenu withCaption: 'Choose a color.' chooseFrom: #('red' 'green' 'blue').
color print. "prints choice to the Transcript as an index 1@comma{} 2@comma{} or 3"}

@cindex widget @subentry menu @subentry selection
@subsection Selection menu

The @class{SelectionMenu} class is a subclass of @class{PopupMenu}; it
gives a bit more flexibility to the developer. Indeed, once the user
selects a menu entry, instead of returning this index entry as
@class{PopUpMenu} does, it can return an associated object to this
entry. It is therefore more flexible.

In our example we want a color object instead of an index. To do so, we tell
@class{SelectionMenu} about a collection of colors from which to obtain the
returned value depending on the user-selected menu entry.

For example:

@smalltalkExampleCaption{Selection menu with object answer, popupMenu5,
labels := #('Red sky at sunset' 'A Clockwork Orange'
   'Yellow submarine' 'Green peace' 'The Blue dot' 'Purple rain').
lines := #(3 6). "draw lines after these indexes"
colors := @{Color red . Color orange . Color yellow . Color green . Color blue . Color purple@}.
menu := SelectionMenu labels: labels lines: lines selections: colors.
selection := menu startUpMenu.
selection print. "prints the selected menu entry's object"}

@figure{A selection menu without title, ch04-selectionmenu, 3}

If you would rather return the index of the selected menu entry, simply call
the @class{SelectionMenu} class's instance creation method @method{labels:lines:}
instead. To do so, remove the line beginning with 'colors' in our example above
and replace the line beginning with 'menu' with this line:

@smalltalkExampleCaption{Selection menu with index answer, popupMenu6,
menu := SelectionMenu labels: labels lines: lines. "replaces previous menu line"}

In the following example, we demonstrate a use case of
@class{SelectionMenu} in a @class{MenuDemo} class.

@smalltalkExample{Object subclass: #MenuDemo
   instanceVariableNames: 'colorButton statusLabel window'
   classVariableNames: ''
   poolDictionaries: ''
   category: 'Demos'}

@figure{A button to invoke a selection menu, ch04-selectionmenu1, 4.5}

We put in place all the widgetry involved.

@smalltalkMethod{initialize,
colorButton := PluggableButtonMorph
   model: self
   action: #openMenu
   label: 'Select Color'.
statusLabel := LabelMorph contents: ''.

window := SystemWindow new.
window layoutMorph separation: 10.
window
   setLabel: 'Menu Demo';
   addMorph: colorButton;
   addMorph: statusLabel;
   openInWorld;
   morphExtent: (400 @@ window layoutMorph minimumExtent y)}

Once the button is clicked, we request at runtime the menu with the
appropriate selection of colors from which to pick an answer.

@smalltalkMethod{colorMenu,
@return{} SelectionMenu 
   labels: #('Red sky at sunset' 'A Clockwork Orange' 'Yellow submarine' 'Green peace'
      'The Blue dot' 'Purple rain')
   selections: @{Color red . Color orange . Color yellow . Color green . Color blue . Color purple@}}

@figure{A selection menu open, ch04-selectionmenu2, 6}

Then we adjust the window color and button label accordingly:

@smalltalkMethod{openMenu,
| selectedColor |
(selectedColor := self colorMenu startUpMenu) ifNotNil: [
   colorButton label: selectedColor name.
   statusLabel contents: ('You selected @{1@}.' format: @{ selectedColor name @}).
   window layoutMorph color: (selectedColor alpha: 0.6) ]}

@figure{Result of the user selection in the menu, ch04-selectionmenu3, 4.5}

To run this, evaluate @smalltalk{MenuDemo new} in a Workspace.

The example above requests the name of the color by sending the
message @msg{name} to a color; you need the package
@label{Color-Extras} to get an English name, otherwise the message
returns the color composition in the RGB space. Install it by
executing @smalltalk{Feature require: #'Color-Extras'}, browse it to
discover what it offers.

@cindex widget @subentry menu @subentry string request

@subsection String Request

The class @class{StringRequestMorph} prompts the user to enter a text
response. It can verify the response using a provided block that returns a
Boolean value indicating whether the response is valid. It can also
evaluate a block if the user clicks the cancel button.

For example:

@figure{A StringRequestMorph open, ch04-stringrequestmorph, 6}

@smalltalkExampleCaption{Request a string from the user, stringRequest1,
StringRequestMorph
    request: 'Comment'
    initialAnswer: 'no comment'
    verifying: [ :answer | answer isEmpty not ]
    do: [ :answer | answer print ]
    orCancel: [ 'canceled' print ].}

@cindex widget @subentry text entry
@node Text entry
@section Text Entry

The @class{TextModelMorph} class can be used for single or multiple
line text input. It is a very important and complex class with a lot
of features:

@cindex widget @subentry text entry @subentry features
@itemize
   @item
   @strong{Input field.} Single line or multiple lines.

   @item
   @strong{Code editing.} Syntax formatting and coloring, code
completion.

   @item
   @strong{Style.} Text colors and attributes such as bold, italic,
underlined, etc.

   @item
   @strong{Font.} TrueType font selection with various sizes.

   @item
   @strong{Paragraph.} Text alignment.
@end itemize

The following code creates an instance of @class{TextModelMorph},
changes its value, and prints its value:

@smalltalkExampleCaption{Simple text entry,textEntry1,
textEntry := TextModelMorph withText: 'initial content'.
textEntry openInWorld.
textEntry editor actualContents: 'new content'.
textEntry text print}

Typically, you will want to modify many aspects of this morph such as its
size and whether words automatically wrap to new lines. By default, words
that would extend past the right side wrap to the next line. To prevent
wrapping:

@smalltalkExample{textEntry wrapFlag: false}

The value associated with a @class{TextModelMorph} is either held in a
@class{TextModel} object or a @class{Text} object.


@cindex widget @subentry text entry @subentry instantiate
There are three common ways to create an instance of
@class{TextModelMorph}.  The choice is based on how the initial value
is supplied and where the current value is held.

@enumerate

@item
@smalltalk{TextModelMorph withText: aTextOrString}

This creates a @class{TextModel} object that is initialized with the
given value, passes it to the next method, and returns what that
returns.

@item
@smalltalk{TextModelMorph withModel: aTextModel}

This approach allows the same @class{TextModel} to be used by multiple
other morphs. It creates an instance, sets its model to a
@class{TextModel}, and returns the instance. With this approach, when
a @class{TextModel} sees its contents changed, it informs its view
about the change:

@smalltalkMethod{actualContents: aTextOrString,
self basicActualContents: aTextOrString.
self changed: #actualContents}

And a @class{TextModelMorph} listens to such changes to update itself:

@smalltalkMethod{update: aSymbol,
super update: aSymbol.
aSymbol ifNil: [ @return{}self].
@dots{}
aSymbol == #actualContents ifTrue: [ @return{}self updateActualContents ].
@dots{} }

@item
@smalltalk{TextModelMorph textProvider: aTextProvider textGetter: getTextSel textSetter: setTextSel}

This approach allows the value to be maintained in any object,
@smalltalk{aTextProvider}, that responds to the given selectors to
provide the text with its @emph{getter} and to update its text
attribute from the text entry with its @emph{setter}.
Underneath, it wraps the text provider in a @class{PluggableTextModel},
which is then the model of the text entry @footnote{Actually, the
@class{TextModelMorph} instance, but the term text entry will be used
preferably to avoid confusion.}.

When a change is notified by the text provider:

@smalltalkMethod{TextProvider >> aMethodDoingSomething,
@dots{}
self changed: #getterSymbol.
@dots{} }

The pluggable model receives an update which in turn notifies of the change:

@smalltalkMethod{PluggableTextModel >> update: aSymbol,
@dots{}
aSymbol == textGetter ifTrue: [ @return{}self changed: #acceptedContents ].
aSymbol == selectionGetter ifTrue: [ @return{}self changed: #initialSelection ].
self changed: aSymbol}

Propagated to the text entry to update itself (method partial shown above):

@smalltalkMethod{update: aSymbol,
@dots{}
aSymbol == #acceptedContents ifTrue: [ @return{}self updateAcceptedContents ].
@dots{}}

@cindex text entry @subentry @method{hasUnaccpetedEdits:}
Beware, the behavior of @method{updateAcceptedContents} may be altered
by the status of @smalltalk{hasUnacceptedEdits} attributes. When
@smalltalk{true}, it may prevent the update of the text entry from
other means when the user has previously keyed-in text. In case of doubt,
try to set this attribute to @smalltalk{false}: @smalltalk{textEntry
hasUnacceptedEdits: false}.


@end enumerate

@cindex widget @subentry text entry @subentry prompt text
To display prompting text inside a @class{TextModelMorph} until the
user begins typing a value, send it the message @msg{emptyTextDisplayMessage:}
with a string argument.


@cindex widget @subentry text entry @subentry color
The default background color of a @class{TextModelMorph} is white.  A
@class{TextModelMorph} only displays a border when it has focus.  One
way to make its bounds apparent when it doesn't have focus is to set
the background color of the parent component.

@smalltalkExample{textEntry owner color: (Color blue alpha: 0.1)}

Another way is to set the background color of the @class{TextModelMorph}.

@smalltalkExample{textEntry color: (Color blue alpha: 0.1)}

@cindex widget @subentry text entry @subentry scroll bar
By default, when there are more lines than fit in the height, a
vertical scroll bar appears.  When wrapping is turned off, if the text
does not fit in the width, then a horizontal scroll bar appears.
To prevent scroll bars from appearing, send the following message to an
instance @msg{hideScrollBarsIndefinitely}.

@cindex widget @subentry text entry @subentry extent

The default size of a @class{TextModelMorph} is 200 by 100.  This is
set in the @method{initialize} method of @class{PluggableMorph}, which
is the superclass of @class{PluggableScrollPane}, which is the
superclass of @class{TextModelMorph}.  Depending on the font, the
default size displays around four lines of wrapping text with around
17 characters per line. To change the size:

@smalltalkExample{textEntry morphExtent: width @@ height}

The size should include space for scroll bars if they may be needed.
Setting the height to zero causes it to actually be set to the height
required for a single line in the current font.

@cindex widget @subentry text entry @subentry tab focus

By default, pressing the tab key does not move focus from one
@class{TextModelMorph} instance to another.  To enable this, do the
following for each instance:

@smalltalkExample{textEntry tabToFocus: true}

When the user changes the text in a @class{TextModelMorph}, the object
that holds its value is not automatically updated.  To manually
request the update:


@cindex widget @subentry text entry @subentry accept contents
@cindex widget @subentry text entry @subentry model update

@smalltalkExample{textEntry scroller acceptContents}

There are multiple ways to configure user actions to trigger an update
in the model, a text provider or a text model as described previously.
The easiest are:

@smalltalkExample{textEntry acceptOnAny: true. "updates after every keystroke"
textEntry acceptOnCR: true. "updates after return key is pressed"}

To listen for changes to the value of a @class{TextModelMorph}:

@smalltalkExample{textEntry keystrokeAction: [:event |
    | value |
    value := textEntry text.
    "Do something with the value."]}

@cindex widget @subentry text entry @subentry discard

By default, if the user attempts to close a @class{SystemWindow} and
it contains @class{TextModelMorph} instances that have unsaved
changes, they are asked to confirm this with the message "Changes have
not been saved. Is it OK to cancel those changes?" The user must
select "Yes" to close the window.

To disable this check for a particular instance of @class{TextModelMorph},
send it @msg{askBeforeDiscardingEdits:} with the argument @smalltalk{false}.

@cindex widget @subentry text entry @subentry one line
The following code creates a single-line text input with a given width
that never shows scroll bars:

@smalltalkExample{textEntry := TextModelMorph withText: '' ::
    hideScrollBarsIndefinitely;
    morphExtent: 200 @@ 0; "calculates required height for one line"
    wrapFlag: false.}

If the text exceeds the width, use the left and right arrow keys to
scroll the text.

@cindex widget @subentry text entry @subentry selection
To select all the content in an instance, send it @msg{selectAll}.  To
select content from one index to another where both are inclusive:

@smalltalkExample{textEntry selectFrom: startIndex to: endIndex.}

To place the text cursor at the end of the current content:

@smalltalkExample{index := textEntry text size + 1.
textEntry selectFrom: index to: index.}


@cindex widget @subentry text entry @subentry action on key stroke 
The following code demonstrates listening for key events.  It prints
their ASCII codes and character representations to the Transcript.

@smalltalkExample{textEntry keystrokeAction: [:evt |
   evt keyValue print.
   evt keyCharacter print ]}

@anchor{textModelMorphExample}
Let's combine what we have learned above to create a small
application.  The user can enter their first and last name.  Clicking
the "Greet" button displays a greeting message below the button.

@figure{User Interaction Demo, ch04-userinteraction-example1, 7} 

Create the class @class{UserInteractionDemo} as follows:

@smalltalkExample{Object subclass: #UserInteractionDemo
    instanceVariableNames: 'firstName greetLabel lastName'
    classVariableNames: ''
    poolDictionaries: ''
    category: 'Demo'}

Define the following accessor methods:

@smalltalkMethod{firstName,
@return{} firstName ifNil: [firstName := '']}

@smalltalkMethod{firstName: aString,
firstName := aString}

@dots{}

As we need two input fields, we define the instance method
@method{textEntryOn:}

@smalltalkMethod{textEntryOn: aSymbol,
"Answer a TextModelMorph where aSymbol provides the name for the getter and setter."
| entry |
entry := TextModelMorph textProvider: self textGetter: aSymbol textSetter: (aSymbol@comma{} ':') asSymbol ::
   acceptOnAny: true; " The model is updated at each key stroke "
   askBeforeDiscardingEdits: false;
   hideScrollBarsIndefinitely;
   " Height to zero causes it to use minimum height for one line. "
   morphExtent: 0 @@ 0;
   tabToFocus: true;
   wrapFlag: false.
entry layoutSpec proportionalWidth: 1. "width is 100%"
@return{} entry}


@cindex widget @subentry label

Our text entries are then packed in a row with the appropriate label:

@smalltalkMethod{rowLabeled: aString for: aMorph,
"Answer a row LayoutMorph containing a LabelMorph and a given morph."
| row |
row := LayoutMorph newRow ::
   gap: 10;
   addMorph: (LabelMorph contents: aString);
   addMorph: aMorph.
row layoutSpec proportionalHeight: 0.
@return{} row}

We define an action method for the only button in our small application:

@smalltalkMethod{greet,
| greeting |
greeting := firstName
   ifEmpty: ['']
   ifNotEmpty: [ 'Hello @{1@} @{2@}!' format: @{firstName. lastName@} ].
greetLabel contents: greeting}

Finally, our @method{initialize} method packs all the involved morphs
together:

@smalltalkMethod{initialize,
| button image window |
	
"Relative file paths start from the Cuis-Smalltalk-Dev-UserFiles directory."
image := ImageMorph newWith: (Form fromFileNamed: './hot-air-balloon.png' ::
   magnifyBy: 0.5).
button := PluggableButtonMorph model: self action: #greet label: 'Greet'.
greetLabel := LabelMorph contents: ''.
	
window := SystemWindow new ::
   setLabel: 'User Interaction Demo';
   addMorph: image;
   addMorph: (self rowLabeled: 'First Name:' for: (self textEntryOn: #firstName));
   addMorph: (self rowLabeled: 'Last Name:' for: (self textEntryOn: #lastName));
   addMorph: button;
   addMorph: greetLabel;
   openInWorld.
		
" Once the window is open and properly laid out@comma{}  we adjust its size 
  to the smallest height that contains its submorphs."
window morphExtent: 400 @@ window minimumExtent y.	
	
" Override the automatic Window color scheme "
window layoutMorph 
   separation: 10;
   color: (Color blue alpha: 0.1)}

In @ref{Which components? Where to find more?}, you will learn how to use
additional @cuis{} packages to ease the creation of such dialog windows.

			
@cindex widget @subentry list
@node List
@section List

The @class{PluggableListMorph} displays a scrollable list of items.
Users can select an item by clicking it or by typing its first few letters.

Let's create a small application that allows users to select a color
from a list to change the background color of the window.
Users can also add new colors and delete existing colors.

In addition to demonstrating the use of @class{PluggableListMorph},
we will also see how to disable buttons when their use is not appropriate.

@figure{List Demo, ch04-userinteraction-example2, 5} 

Create the following class:

@smalltalkExample{Object subclass: #ListDemo
    instanceVariableNames: 'colorList colors deleteButton
        newColorEntry selectedColorIndex selectedLabel window'
    classVariableNames: ''
    poolDictionaries: ''
    category: 'Demos'}

Add the following instance methods. We start with a somewhat long
@method{initialize} method responsible for building the whole GUI.

@smalltalkMethod{initialize,
| addButton layout row |
    
colors := SortedCollection newFrom: #(red orange yellow green blue purple).
selectedColorIndex := 0.
colorList := PluggableListMorph
   withModel: self
   listGetter: #colors
   indexGetter: #selectedColorIndex
   indexSetter: #selectedColorIndex:.
colorList layoutSpec: (LayoutSpec proportionalWidth: 1).
    
newColorEntry :=  self textEntryOn: #newColor.
newColorEntry emptyTextDisplayMessage: 'new color'.
    
addButton := PluggableButtonMorph model: self action: #addColor label: 'Add'.
    
row := LayoutMorph newRow
   gap: 10;
   addMorph: newColorEntry;
   addMorph: addButton.

deleteButton := PluggableButtonMorph
   model: self
   action: #deleteColor
   label: 'Delete Selected Color'.
    
selectedLabel := LabelMorph contents: ''.
window := SystemWindow new.    
window
   setLabel: 'List Demo';
   addMorph: colorList;
   addMorph: row;
   addMorph: deleteButton;
   addMorph: selectedLabel;
   openInWorld.

"sets initial background color"
self selectedColorIndex: 0. 

"Set window size to the smallest height that contains its submorphs."
layout := window layoutMorph.
layout separation: 10.
window morphExtent: 250 @@ layout minimumExtent y}

Observe at the beginning of the @method{initialize} method the
creation of the list; its model is @smalltalk{self}, therefore an
instance of @class{ListDemo}. In a real application, it should be a
model object representing some type of data. Associated with the model
are the messages to send to @smalltalk{self} to retrieve the list
contents (@msg{colors}), to get the index of the selected entry in the
list (@msg{selectedColorIndex}), and to set the selected index
(@msg{selectedColorIndex:}). The methods responding to these messages are implemented in
@class{ListDemo}:

@smalltalkMethod{addColor,
self newColor: newColorEntry text}

@smalltalkMethod{colors,
@return{} colors}

@smalltalkMethod{deleteColor,
selectedColorIndex = 0 ifFalse: [
   colors removeAt: selectedColorIndex.
   self selectedColorIndex: 0.
   colorList updateList.
   selectedLabel contents: '' ]}

@smalltalkMethod{newColor,
"In this app there is no need to retrieve this value or even hold it in an instance variable@comma{}
 but TextModelMorph requires that this method exists."
    
@return{} ''}

When a new color is input by the user, we add it to the @smalltalk{colors}
collection, update the list, then select this color from the list. To
prepare for any additional new color input, we clear the text entry by
emitting the event @smalltalk{#newColor}.

@smalltalkMethod{newColor: aText,
| potentialColor |

potentialColor := aText asString withBlanksTrimmed.
potentialColor ifNotEmpty: [
   colors add: potentialColor asSymbol.
   colorList updateList.
   self selectedColorIndex: (colors indexOf: potentialColor ).
   self changed: #clearUserEdits.
   self changed: #newColor ]}

@cindex collection @subentry index

Remember, in Smalltalk, the index of a collection naturally starts with one.
Therefore, an index of zero naturally indicates that no item is selected in
the collection.

@smalltalkMethod{selectedColorIndex,
@return{} selectedColorIndex}

This method is called when the user clicks or unclicks an item in the list.
As recalled earlier, an index of zero indicates that no item was
@smalltalk{selected}. If the color cannot be determined by the name added
to the list or is empty, a default gray color is set as the background
color of the window.

@smalltalkMethod{selectedColorIndex: anIndex,
| color colorName selected |
    
selectedColorIndex := anIndex.

selected := anIndex ~= 0.
deleteButton enableSelector: selected.
colorName := selected ifTrue: [ colors at: anIndex ].
    
selectedLabel contents: (colorName
   ifNil: ['']
   ifNotNil: [ 'You selected @{1@}.' format: @{ colorName @} ] ).

color := colorName
   ifNil: [ Color gray ]
   ifNotNil: [ [ Color perform: colorName ] on: MessageNotUnderstood do: [ Color gray ] ].
window layoutMorph color: (color alpha: 0.6)}

@smalltalkMethod{textEntryOn: aGetter,
"Answer a TextModelMorph where aGetter provides the symbol for the getter."
| entry |
        
entry := TextModelMorph
   textProvider: self textGetter: aGetter textSetter: (aGetter@comma{} ':') asSymbol ::
   acceptOnCR: true;
   askBeforeDiscardingEdits: false;
   hideScrollBarsIndefinitely.

entry morphExtent: 0 @@ 0.
entry layoutSpec: (LayoutSpec proportionalWidth: 1).
@return{} entry}

@node Memory game
@section Memory Game

To illustrate user interactions with the mouse, we present in this
section a memory color game. This is a board game where a collection
of cards is presented to the user with a common neutral color; each
card has its own color, hidden at game startup. The user must find the
cards sharing the same color. When the user clicks on a card, its
color is revealed; the card with the matching color must be
found. When a pair of cards is found, the pair is no longer playable;
if not, the cards' colors are hidden again, or @emph{flipped}. Two
kinds of morphs are used in the design of the game: a @class{SystemWindow}
and a @class{PluggableButtonMorph}. The complete source is presented
in the appendix @ref{Memory Game v1} of the book. We will not present
every part of the code design, but we will focus on the illustrative
ones regarding the topic of this chapter.

The game is started with:

@smalltalkExample{MemoryGameWindow new openInWorld}

@figure{Memory color game, ch04-memoryGame,8}

@cindex widget @subentry button

@unnumberedsubsec The Cards

What are the attributes we want a card to have? We need a card to have
a specific @emph{card color} and a status flag to indicate if we are
@emph{done} with the card, meaning we have found a matching pair.
The card is a morph able to paint itself with a color. It reacts to user
clicks to flip itself between its @emph{card color} and the common neutral
color. 

What we want is a kind of button:

@smalltalkExample{PluggableButtonMorph subclass: #MemoryCard
   instanceVariableNames: 'cardColor done'
   classVariableNames: ''
   poolDictionaries: ''
   category: 'MemoryGameV1'}

The default color, common to all cards, is white:

@smalltalkMethod{defaultColor,
@return{} Color white}

A card knows it is flipped when its @smalltalk{cardColor} is the
color of the button:

@smalltalkMethod{isFlipped,
@return{} color = cardColor }

And the card can flip between the default color and its own
@smalltalk{cardColor}:

@smalltalkMethod{flip,
color := self isFlipped ifTrue: [self defaultColor] ifFalse: [cardColor].
self redrawNeeded}

@smalltalk{color} is used to paint the button; when adjusting it, we
send the message @msg{redrawNeeded} to the button to force it to redraw.

@cindex widget @subentry window

@unnumberedsubsec The Board

What are the attributes of the game board? It knows about the
@emph{playground}, set to a specific @emph{size}, where the
@emph{cards} are presented to the user. It communicates messages
through its @emph{status bar} and it knows if the user is
@emph{playing} or not. The game is presented in a window with all
these attributes:

@smalltalkExample{SystemWindow subclass: #MemoryGameWindow
   instanceVariableNames: 'size cards tupleSize statusBar playground playing'
   classVariableNames: ''
   poolDictionaries: ''
   category: 'MemoryGameV1'}

The board presents a toolbar, its playground, and a status bar in a
window using a column @smalltalk{LayoutMorph}:

@smalltalkMethod{initialize,
super initialize.
size := 4 @@ 3.
tupleSize := 2.
playing := true.
playground := LayoutMorph newColumn.
self installToolbar.
self addMorph: playground.
self installCards.
self installStatusBar}

Indeed, by default, a @class{SystemWindow} comes with a layout, set as a
column. The @smalltalk{playground} is also a column layout; the cards are
arranged into several rows.

@subsubsection Installing the Game

@cuis{} does not come with any notion of a toolbar, but it is fairly easy to
create one with a row @smalltalk{LayoutMorph} and some buttons:

@smalltalkMethod{installToolbar,
| toolbar button |
toolbar := LayoutMorph newRow separation: 2.
button := PluggableButtonMorph model: self action: #startGame :: 
   enableSelector: #isStopped;
   icon: Theme current playIcon;
   borderWidth: 2;
   borderColor: Color black;
   setBalloonText: 'Play the game';
   morphExtent: 32 asPoint.
toolbar addMorph: button.
@dots{}
self addMorph: toolbar layoutSpec: LayoutSpec new useMorphHeight}

Observe @smalltalk{enableSelector: #isStopped}; indeed the ``Play''
button is only active when the game @smalltalk{isStopped}. The same
applies with the ``Stop'' button -- not shown here. The toolbar height
-- row layout -- is shrunk to the height of its submorphs; to do so,
the toolbar is added to the window with the appropriate specification
@smalltalk{LayoutSpec new useMorphHeight}.

We first clear the @smalltalk{playground}, then install the cards in several
rows. We remember each card's position which we can access via x and y coordinates
by storing the @smalltalk{cards} in a special @class{Array2D} array. The colors to 
be used are randomly shuffled and then assigned in the inner @msg{to:do:} block:

@smalltalkMethod{installCards,
| colors  row |
playground removeAllMorphs.
cards := Array2D  newSize: size.
colors := self distributeColors shuffled.
1 to: size y do: [:y |
   row := LayoutMorph newRow.
   1 to: size x do: [:x | | card |
      card := MemoryCard model: self action: #flip: actionArgument: x@@y.
      card layoutSpec: (LayoutSpec proportionalWidth: 1 proportionalHeight: 1).
      card cardColor: colors removeFirst.
      row addMorph: card.
      cards at: x@@y put: card ].
   playground addMorph: row ]}

We make the card interactive by using the @class{PluggableButtonMorph}'s @smalltalk{model:action:actionArgument:} selector. When clicked, the
message @msg{flip:} is sent to the game window with the card's x and y position
in the @smalltalk{cards} array and playground:

@smalltalkExample{MemoryCard model: self action: #flip: actionArgument: x@@y}

@cindex morph @subentry @msg{lock}
@subsubsection Game Logic
The core of the game logic is in the @method{flip:} method. It first
flips and locks@footnote{The @msg{lock} message is part of the
@class{Morph} protocol, and it suppresses all kinds of user interaction
with a given morph.} the clicked card:

@smalltalkMethod{flip: position,
| flippedCards |
(cards at: position) flip; lock.}

Then it detects if all the flipped cards share the same color. To do so, we perform
a clever trick in Smalltalk: we collect all the colors of the flipped cards,
then convert the collection of colors into a @class{Set} instance; all duplicated
colors are removed. If the size of the resulting set is not 1, it means the cards
have different colors. In that case, we inform the user with a message, then
unflip and unlock the clicked cards:

@smalltalkExample{flippedCards := self flippedCards.
(flippedCards collect: [:aCard | aCard cardColor]) asSet size = 1 ifFalse: [
   "Give some time for the player to see the color of this card "
   self message: 'Colors do not match!'.
   self world doOneCycleNow.
   (Delay forSeconds: 1) wait.
   " Colors do not match@comma{} unflip the flipped cards and unlock "
   flippedCards do: [:aCard | aCard flip; unlock].
   @return{} self]}

If the colors match, we check if we have reached the @smalltalk{tupleSize}
association count -- initialized by default to 2, to make pairs of
cards. If so, we make the cards flash and mark them as
@smalltalk{done} so they can't be played anymore:

@smalltalkExample{
   flippedCards size = tupleSize ifTrue: [
      " We found a n-tuple! "
      self message: 'Great!' bold@comma{} ' You found a '@comma{} tupleSize asString@comma{} '-tuple!'.
      flippedCards do: #flash.
      flippedCards do: #setDone.}

At this point in the game logic, in the event of a game win, we inform the user
and update the game status:

@smalltalkExample{
      self isGameWon ifTrue: [
         self message: 'Congratulations@comma{} you finished the game!' bold red.
         playing := false] ]}

@subsubsection Messages to the User

The user is kept informed during gameplay by displaying messages in the status bar. 
This is set up at initialization time in the following method:

@smalltalkMethod{installStatusBar,
statusBar := TextParagraphMorph new
   padding: 2;
   color: Color transparent;
   borderWidth: 1;
   borderColor: self borderColor twiceLighter ;
   setHeightOnContent.
self addMorph: statusBar layoutSpec: LayoutSpec new useMorphHeight.
self message: 'Welcome to '@comma{} 'Memory Game' bold}

Its companion method @msg{message:} writes a new text message by updating the
contents of the @class{TextParagraphMorph} instance:

@smalltalkMethod{message: aText,
statusBar contents: aText ;
   redrawNeeded }

@cindex text
@cindex widget @subentry text

A message sent to the status bar can be more than just a plain string; it can be a
@class{Text} instance with styling attributes. To do so, we send specific
messages to a string. For example, @smalltalk{'hello' bold} converts the 'hello'
string to a @class{Text} instance set to a bold style.

Examples of styling:

@smalltalkExample{'Hello' red bold.
'Hello ' italic, ' my love' red bold.}

To discover more message style attributes, browse the method categories @label{text
conversion ...} of the @class{CharacterSequence} class.

@subsubsection Access and Test

In the core logic of the game, we access the flipped cards in the
playground by selecting the cards both @emph{not done} and @emph{flipped}:

@smalltalkMethod{flippedCards,
@return{} cards elements select: [:aCard | aCard isDone not and: [aCard isFlipped] ]}

The @class{Array2D} instance of the @smalltalk{cards} variable offers
access to its cells with x and y coordinates; however, it does not
offer the full range of the @class{Collection} protocol, particularly the @method{select:} method. Nevertheless, its underlying @smalltalk{elements} attribute is an @class{Array}, which @emph{is}
part of the @class{Collection} hierarchy; we use it to get the full power of
the @class{Collection} protocol. We proceed the same way to select the @emph{done} cards:

@smalltalkMethod{doneCards,
@return{} cards elements select: #isDone}

And undone cards are selected by a removal operation, prone to
resist code evolution in the card protocol:

@smalltalkMethod{undoneCards,
@return{} cards elements asOrderedCollection 
   removeAll: self doneCards;
   yourself}

In the core logic of the game, we test if the game is won by testing if all the cards
@emph{are done}. In that case, this count is equal to the number of cards in the game:

@smalltalkMethod{isGameWon,
@return{} (cards elements select: #isDone) size = (size x * size y)}

The remaining methods of the game do not require comment; they can be
read in the complete source code of the @ref{Memory Game v1}.
