@node Which components? Where to find more?
@chapter Which Components? Where to Find More?

@*

In this chapter, we present additional morphs that are useful for building GUIs.
Some of these components ease the process of designing GUI dialogs, as
presented in @ref{Handle user interaction}. However, many bring
additional features, and we will present a selection of those.

@menu
* Cuis-Smalltalk-UI::
* Easing GUI design::
* Additional features::
@end menu

@cindex widget @subentry additional components

@node Cuis-Smalltalk-UI
@section Cuis-Smalltalk-UI

Check that you have the @file{Cuis-Smalltalk-UI} repository already
installed. It comes with several @cuis{} packages for GUI building. If not
present in your host, clone its repository into the parent directory of your
installed @file{Cuis-Smalltalk-Dev} system:

@example
cd yourPath/Cuis-Smalltalk-Dev
cd ..
git clone --depth 1 https://github.com/Cuis-Smalltalk/Cuis-Smalltalk-UI
@end example

The repository contents are divided into several packages whose classes
are listed for reference on the @file{README} page of the repository. In the
following sections, we will install the appropriate packages individually as
needed.

@node Easing GUI design
@section Easing GUI Design

Let's start the exploration with a few components to ease the creation of
a GUI.

@cindex widget @subentry label @subentry squeeze

@subsection Label That Squeezes

Sometimes, labels may tend to occupy more space than is available.
This becomes particularly true when you do not control the content of a
label, such as when an application is translated into other languages,
which may have more or less verbose ways of expressing messages or concepts.

The @class{SqueezeLabelMorph} tries its best to contract a message into a
given number of characters. It is part of the @file{UI-Core.pck.st}
package. In a Workspace, install it by executing the appropriate command:

@smalltalkExample{Feature require: 'UI-Core'}

This kind of label is set with a minimum number of characters it is
willing to display. If that minimum number is lower than the label's
content, it will contract the text:

@smalltalkExampleCaption{Label that squeezes, labelSqueeze1,
(SqueezeLabelMorph
   contents: 'I am a very looong label with possibly not enough room for my characters'
   minCharsToShow: 20) openInWorld.}

The content of the label above is longer than the value of @smalltalk{minCharsToShow:}
which we have set to 20 characters. Observe how such a squeezed label reveals its complete
content in the balloon text when the pointer is hovering over it, and how capitalization
of words occurs to make the contracted label easier to comprehend.

@figure{A label squeezed to 20 characters,ch06-squeezeLabel,6}

When more space is made available to the label, more characters are revealed:

@figure{A squeezed label given some more space,ch06-squeezeLabelMore,6}

Packing a @class{SqueezeLabelMorph} in a layout morph with other morphs
will affect the minimal width of the owner layout.

Compare the two examples that follow, one with a squeezed label, and one with
a regular label:

@smalltalkExampleCaption{Squeezed label for a text entry,labelTextEntry1,
| label row | 
label := SqueezeLabelMorph 
	contents: 'I am a very long label'
	minCharsToShow: 15.
row := LayoutMorph newRow.
row
   addMorph: label;
   addMorph: (TextModelMorph withText: 'some input' :: morphExtent: 100@@0).
row openInWorld}

The whole layout is contracted to a smaller width.

@figure{A text entry with a squeezed label,ch06-squeezeLabelLayout,4}

Now compare this to a regular label use case:

@figure{A text entry with a regular label,ch06-labelLayout,5}

@smalltalkExampleCaption{Regular label for a text entry,labelTextEntry2,
| row | 
row := LayoutMorph newRow.
row
   addMorph: (LabelMorph contents: 'I am a very long label');
   addMorph: (TextModelMorph withText: 'some input' :: morphExtent: 100@@0).
row openInWorld}

It is up to you to decide between compactness of the GUI and readability
of the labels.

@cindex widget @subentry text entry @subentry one line

@subsection One Line Entry

In @ref{Text entry}, we presented a quite complex and feature-complete
class to handle multiple lines of text editing. That's a bit overkill
when only one line of editing is needed. In that circumstance, you can
alternatively use the @class{TextEntryMorph}, part of the
@file{UI-Entry} package:

@smalltalkExample{Feature require: 'UI-Entry'}

This class is quite simple, and contrary to the @class{TextModelMorph}, it
does not need a text model. Therefore, there is no changed/update mechanism
involved; it is a passive morph.

However, it offers two options to interact with other objects:

@enumerate
@item
Send it the message @msg{acceptCancelReceiver:} to attach an object
answering to the @msg{accept} and @msg{cancel} messages when the
@kbd{Enter} or @kbd{Esc} keys are pressed.

@item
Send it the message @msg{crAction:} to set a block of code, with no
argument, to be executed when the @kbd{Enter} key is pressed.
@end enumerate

Let's experiment with the associated object answering to the
@msg{accept} and @msg{cancel} messages. We need a
@class{TextEntryDemo} class:

@smalltalkExample{Object subclass: #TextEntryDemo
   instanceVariableNames: 'value entry'
   classVariableNames: ''
   poolDictionaries: ''
   category: 'DesignGUI-Booklet'}

At initialization time, we create all the needed objects:

@smalltalkMethod{initialize,
value := '42'.
entry := TextEntryMorph contents: value.
entry acceptCancelReceiver: self.
entry openInWorld}

Now we make our @class{TextEntryDemo} respond to the @msg{accept} and
@msg{cancel} messages. When pressing @kbd{Enter}, we update our
@smalltalk{value} attribute:

@smalltalkMethod{accept,
value := entry contents.
'I accepted the input ' print.
('value = '@comma{} value) print}

But when pressing @kbd{Esc}, we just delete the morph:

@smalltalkMethod{cancel,
'I discarded the input' print.
entry delete}

Observe that we only need the accessors @msg{contents}/@msg{contents:} to set
and retrieve its content. It is a very simple class to use. If dependency
mechanisms were needed, an intermediate object such as the
@class{TextEntryDemo} can still be used with the observer pattern.

@cindex widget @subentry labelling
@cindex widget @subentry group

@subsection Labelling Widget

In our @ref{textModelMorphExample,,User Interaction Demo}, we used a layout to
associate a text entry with a label; a very common task when
building a GUI. The @class{LabelGroup} does exactly that for an arbitrary
number of morphs.

@smalltalkExample{Feature require: 'UI-Widgets'}

When creating a @class{LabelGroup}, we associate labels and
widgets/controls into a unique group. In return, the user gets a layout to be
inserted in a dialog or a window.

@smalltalkExampleCaption{Labelling a group of morphs, labelMorphs,
(LabelGroup with: @{
'First Name:' -> TextEntryMorph new.
'Last Name:' -> TextEntryMorph new@}) openInWorld}

@figure{Text entries associated with labels,ch06-labelGroup,3.5}

The label group also gives access to the controls, although it is not a very
efficient way to access the input widgets used in the group; it is handy.

@figure{Access to the controls of a label group,ch06-labelGroupControls,6}

A label group is useful when constructing small dialogs. In the next
section, we build one with the morphs we learned in this and the previous
sections.

@cindex panel
@cindex dialog
@cindex window @subentry panel
@cindex window @subentry dialog

@subsection Packing in Panel & Dialog

Small windows the user interacts with are called dialogs or panels.
@file{Cuis-Smalltalk-UI} offers several alternatives to use.

@smalltalkExample{Feature require: 'UI-Panel'}

Let's rewrite our @ref{textModelMorphExample,,User Interaction Demo}
with what we just learned. The end result will look like this:

@figure{A greeting dialog, ch06-greetingDialog, 6}

In the hierarchy provided by the @file{UI-Panel} package, we use the
@class{DialogPanel} class. It offers both an area to plug in our
interactive components and an area for our buttons.

@smalltalkExample{DialogPanel subclass: #GreetingPanel
   instanceVariableNames: 'firstName lastName greetLabel'
   classVariableNames: ''
   poolDictionaries: ''
   category: 'DesignGUI-Booklet'}

We set the default color of the dialog:

@smalltalkMethod{defaultColor,
@return{} `Color lightOrange`}

Then install the iconic buttons for its title:

@smalltalkMethod{initialize,
super initialize.
self showButtonsNamed: #(close expand)}

To learn about the available buttons for the title bar of a panel, read
the class @class{WindowTitleMorph}. The expand action needs a rewrite of
its associated action:

@smalltalkMethod{expandButtonClicked,
self fullScreen}

We set our components in the dedicated @method{newPane} method of the
@class{Dialog} hierarchy:

@smalltalkMethod{newPane,
| column group |
column := LayoutMorph newColumn :: 
   color: Color transparent;
   gap: 10 .
group := LabelGroup with: @{
   'First Name: ' -> (firstName := TextEntryMorph contents: '') .
   'Last Name: ' -> (lastName := TextEntryMorph contents: '') @}.
greetLabel := LabelMorph contents: '' font: nil emphasis: 1.
column 
   addMorph: group layoutSpec: (LayoutSpec fixedWidth: 300);
   addMorph: greetLabel layoutSpec: (
      LayoutSpec proportionalWidth: 0 fixedHeight: 20 offAxisEdgeWeight: #center).
@return{} column}

The button also has its own method for installation:

@smalltalkMethod{newButtonArea,
@return{} PluggableButtonMorph model: self action: #greet label: 'Greet' ::
   color: self widgetsColor}

Finally, we implement the @method{greet} action of the button to update
the @smalltalk{greetLabel}:

@smalltalkMethod{greet,
greetLabel contents: (
   'Hello @{1@} @{2@}!' format: @{firstName contents. lastName contents@})}

@node Additional features
@section Additional Features

In the next sections, we present a very small selection of useful
components. There are many more to explore in the repository; they all
come with example methods to learn from, found on their class side.

@subsection Radio and Check Buttons

These widgets are found in the @file{UI-Click-Select} package. 

@cindex widget @subentry check button

In a GUI, a check button represents a boolean value. They are used in
groups with a text label or any kind of morph to represent its iconic
representation.

@smalltalkExampleCaption{Check group, checkGroup,
| column group |
column := LayoutMorph newColumn.
group := CheckGroup fromList: #('Cuis' 'Pharo' 'Squeak').
group buttons do: [:each | each when: #checkSelection send: #show: to: Transcript].
column
   addMorph: (LabelMorph contents: 'I use...' bold);
   addMorph: group.
column openInWorld}

@figure{A group of check buttons, ch06-checkGroup, 1.5}

To meaningfully manage the check and uncheck events, different action
methods can be set for each check box. The previous example could be
rewritten:

@smalltalkExample{@dots{}
cuisCheck := [:check |
   check isSelected
   ifTrue: ['I use Cuis' print] ifFalse: ['I don''t use Cuis' print] ] .
group buttons first 
   when: #checkSelection 
   send: #value: 
   to: cuisCheck.
@dots{}}

Do not add the @smalltalk{cuisCheck} variable to the declaration at the
first line of the script; otherwise, it will be garbage collected.
Indeed, an action event is weakly referenced -- i.e., it does not add a
count to its reference use. Of course, in an application, you will use a
method selector as the argument of the @msg{to:} keyword.

@cindex widget @subentry radio button

In a radio button group, only one button is selected at a time. When a
new button is selected, the previously selected button is
deselected. A radio button is drawn differently, as a circle. We can
alter our previous greeting dialog to add a radio button group to select a
preferred color:

@smalltalkMethod{newPane,
| column group radioColors |
@dots{}
radioColors := RadioGroup fromList: #(Blue White Red).
radioColors when: #informRadioSelection send: #setColor: to: self.
column 
   addMorph: group layoutSpec: (LayoutSpec  fixedWidth: 300);
   addMorph: radioColors beRow;
@dots{}}

And the associated action method:

@smalltalkMethod{setColor: aColorSymbol, 
self color: (Color perform: aColorSymbol asLowercase asSymbol)}

@figure{Our enhanced dialog to select color with radio buttons,ch06-greetLabelRadio,6}

@cindex widget @subentry drop down button

@subsection Drop Down Button

A drop-down button is a button whose content is selected from a drop-down
list. When the user clicks such a button, a menu is displayed below the
button. The content of the list is textual when using the class
@class{DropDownListMorph}, or it can be any kind of morph when using the
class @class{DropDownButtonMorph}.

We can add a drop-down button to let the user select an icon to decorate
our greeting dialog. We adjust our existing code to add an image morph
to the pane and the drop-down button:

@smalltalkMethod{newPane,
| column group radioColors |
@dots{}
   'Last Name: ' -> (lastName := TextEntryMorph contents: '').
   'Preferred icon: ' -> self dropDownIcons @rbracechar{}.
@dots{}
column 
   addMorph: (myImage := ImageMorph new);
   addMorph: group layoutSpec: (LayoutSpec  fixedWidth: 300);
@dots{}}

The creation of the button is delegated to another method:

@smalltalkMethod{dropDownIcons,
| morphs listModel | 
morphs := #(addressBookIcon chatIcon clockIcon doItIcon findIcon) collect: [:anIcon |
   ImageMorph new ::
      image: ((Theme current perform: anIcon) magnifyTo: 32@@32) ].
listModel := ListModel with: morphs.
listModel when: #listSelectionChanged send: #updateIcon: to: self.
@return{} DropDownButtonMorph 
   withModel: listModel listGetter: #list indexGetter: #listIndex indexSetter: #listIndex:}

We create a collection of image morphs, each with a different icon. We use
a @class{ListModel} to hold the collection and trigger events when the
@emph{list selection is changed}. In that circumstance, the message
@msg{updateIcon:} is sent to the dialog with the list model as the argument;
this method is straightforward:

@smalltalkMethod{updateIcon: aListModel,
myImage image: aListModel selectedItem form}

@figure{A Drop down button of image morphs,ch06-dropDownButton,6}

It is possible to use an application model instead of a @class{ListModel}.
In that circumstance, the associated getter and setter would be
implemented in this model too.

@cindex widget @subentry decorated

@subsection Decorating Component

Decorating a component is a nice way to set a label around one or more
widgets, but it is much more than that. The decorated components are
highlighted with a surrounding line and a textual label, plus an optional
list of quick buttons. The quick buttons can be anything to operate on
the surrounded components.

The class @class{DecoratedPane} is part of the @file{UI-Panel}; it is
likely already installed on your @cuis{} system if you followed along
with the previous sections of this booklet. A decorated pane expects a
morph to decorate, a string, and an optional collection of buttons:

@smalltalkExampleCaption{Decorating a morph, decoratedMorph1,
(DecoratedPane
   open: (Sample03Smiley new)
   label: 'Be Happy') openInWorld }

@figure{A smiley decorated with a 'Be Happy' slogan, ch06-beHappy, 3}

Let's go back to our greeting panel and decorate the
@smalltalk{greetLabel} with an information label and two quick
buttons: one to reset the greeting and a second one to greet the
author of the running @cuis{} image. We need to edit our
@method{newPane} method again:

@cindex icon

@smalltalkMethod{newPane,
| column group radioColors decorator |
@dots{}
greetLabel := LabelMorph contents: '' font: nil emphasis: 1.
decorator := DecoratedPane 
   open: greetLabel 
   label: 'Decorated Label'  
   quickButtons: @{
      PluggableButtonMorph 
         model: [greetLabel contents: 'Hello ', Utilities authorName] action: #value :: 
         icon: (Theme current fetch: #('16x16' 'actions' 'contact-new')) ; 
         setBalloonText: 'Say hello to the Smalltalk author of this running Cuis image.' .
      PluggableButtonMorph 
         model: [greetLabel contents: ''] action: #value :: 
         icon: (Theme current fetch: #('16x16' 'actions' 'edit-clear')); 
         setBalloonText: 'Take back my greeting.' @}.
@dots{}}

Then, in the column morph, we add the @smalltalk{decorator} instead of
the @smalltalk{greetLabel}:

@smalltalkMethod{newPane,
@dots{}
column
   @dots{}
   addMorph: radioColors beRow;
   addMorph: decorator.
@dots{} }

Observe the @class{PluggableButtonMorph}; we use @class{BlockClosure} as a
model and the message @msg{value} as the action to get it executed on
the button click. In a real application, you will more likely use an instance
as a model and an associated method of its protocol.

@figure{The greeting label decorated with two quick buttons, ch06-decoratedPane,6}

@cindex icon @subentry importing

@subsection Importing Icons

Icons are important when designing GUIs. @cuis{} comes with a few sets
of icons. Explore the @label{icons} method category of the
@class{Theme} class; each of these methods returns a @class{Form} to use
as an icon in a @class{PluggableButtonMorph}.

@smalltalkExample{PluggableButtonMorph 
   model: self action: #close :: 
   icon: Theme current closeIcon}

@cindex icon @subentry @class{ContentPack}

There are additional icons found in @class{ContentPack}
instances. Invoke an explorer on @smalltalk{Theme content}@footnote{In
a Workspace, highlight @smalltalk{Theme content} and do
@kbd{Ctrl-Shift-I}} to browse those packs:

@figure{Content packs in @cuis{},ch06-contentPacks,9}

To use one particular icon of a given content pack, you specify its
size, the name of the content pack it belongs to, and the icon name
without the file extension:

@smalltalkExample{Theme current fetch: #('16x16' 'actions' 'appointment-new')}

Several icons come with a @emph{shortcut} found in the @class{Theme} class. 
Alternatively you may want to use your own icons; this is where you use the
@class{IconImporter} class:

@smalltalkExample{Feature require: 'UI-Graphic-Import'}

Beware, it installs the @file{SVG} package too and its dependencies.
It lets you import both @acronym{PNG} and @acronym{SVG} graphic files
and scale them to different square sizes. You create an instance with
a path where to search for the icons:

@smalltalkExample{icons := IconImporter path: '/home/dev/Dynamic-Book/icons'}

Then you ask for a @class{Form} or an @class{ImageMorph} of a given
icon. To use the file @file{group.svg} located in @file{
'/home/dev/Dynamic-Book/icons'} as an icon, and to scale it as a 32x32
pixel form, you write:

@smalltalkExample{icons getForm: #group32}

Or to request an image morph for direct use in your own GUI:

@smalltalkExample{(icons getMorph: #group32) openInHand}

@figure{Request an @class{ImageMorph} from a graphic file, ch06-iconImporterMorph, 1}

The requested icons of a given size are cached in the icon importer;
later requests for the same icon and size have a minimal processing cost.

There are several options to explore in @class{IconImporter}, particularly
when you need to adjust the icon size to the screen density:

@smalltalkExample{" to request an icon with a size set at execution time "
icons getForm: #group ofSize: MyApp iconSize.

" to open an image morph with the given icon "
(icons getMorph: #group ofSize: 64) openInWorld}

With @class{MyApp} deducing the @method{iconSize} from user preferences.

When dealing with @acronym{SVG} graphics, monochrome icons may be painted
with a given color:

@smalltalkExample{icons getForm: #group ofSize: 64 fill: Color red}

@figure{Get a picture as an icon and paint it in red,ch06-iconImporterFill,1.5}


